---
layout: page
title: talks and abstracts
---
**"In the Purity of Whiteness": decimating the everyday corpse. Bombay 1887 - 1953**. _IIM Kolkata_  

This paper discusses the failed cremation movement in Bombay from 1887, till a successful installation of an electric crematoria in 1953. While historians have studied the cremation movement in Europe and America as a health and aesthetic movement of urban lands, this paper questions what happens if such a movement fails in the colony. By tracing the history of the unclaimed body as a product of the crematoria movement in Bombay, this paper argues how bodies that underwent social death were central to the reconfiguration of death rituals in the cities.

**After the First Death, There is No Other" - Afterlife experiences in 20th century Indian cities.** _JNU-Cambridge Ideas in Practice Workshop_  
This paper focuses on the history of two politically backed societies in Calcutta which 'claimed' corpses according to religion. the crucial junctures of Bengal Famine, Communal riots, and a broader question of a national body and dissection feature to exemplify how the corpse became sites of politics of identities - of nations, communities, and often communal. The juncture of 1947, where partition of Bengal refigured local urban and provincial political stakes, also impacted this new site of debate. However, the stakes of these societies were not only determined by community formations, but also by public currencies of 'opening-up' of the body, and a growing anatomical trading and acceptance.  

**The Secret Bodies: Calcutta and the Making of the Productive Cadavers, 1835 - 1946**, _Annual South Asia Conference at Wisconsin-Madison._  

In 1835 when the Calcutta Medical College was established, sixty students dissected 20 human bodies. The annual count rose to 900 bodies by 1855. Historiographically, cadavers and skeletons in India have only been studied as vectors for larger changes in medical education. However, I look into the creation of this ‘cadaver’ as a medical object having both human and material attributes. By reading dual acts of trust/suspicion and secrecy/revealing in administrative documents, I read the ontological production of cadavers from corpses, and their circulation by the colonial state through a study of Calcutta. These documents suggest a vibrant circulation of bodies, but mostly hidden from public in fear of disturbing religious sentiments. Thus government officials deliberately hid names and markers of identities of people whose bodies were circulated as bones, cadavers, body parts and articulated skeletons to become ‘specimens’. While there was no ‘Anatomy Act’, the municipality only picked unclaimed bodies from streets or the river, or the ‘Pauper Hospital’ away from the public eye, to deliver to the dissection rooms. The 'doms' (untouchables who managed the dead) were intrinsic to this cadaver trade, yet they remained officially unacknowledged as the state also saw them as ‘resurrection men’. However, at the same time, the medical educators started creating a coterie of trusted Indians who could participate in producing the cadaver. This trusted ‘medical public’ was created through medical education. Soon, as Tagore wondered, skeletons for education reached the 'bhadralok' lives. The economic production of corpses was not devoid of a pre-colonial past, but corpses were re-defined with colonial encounters. By reading medical courses, municipal by-laws, police documents, Medical Board transactions, sanitary reports and riot testimonies, this paper for the first time look into the role of the colonial state in India in the well-guarded creation and circulation of cadavers.  

**Nineteenth Century Calcutta and its Deathscapes**. _IIT-Delhi Graduate Student Conference_ (Best Paper)  

On a very modest estimate, about two hundred people died each day in Calcutta in the 1890s. Looking back into the longer 19th century, various administrative groups were concerned with the fate of these corpses. Earlier, the East India Company concerned itself with managing death, disposal and the aesthetics of burial of the European officials, their family and the soldiers. With the transference of power to the Crown, consecutive International Sanitary Conferences of the 1850s and 1860s, and a harsh Army Sanitary Commission Report, stronger attempts were made to bring burials and cremations under the grasp of municipal administration. More Indian deaths were counted, burial boards were set up, and active measures were sought to dispose floating corpses choking the arteries of the river. But this was not a uniform development. No laws directly abolished the sinking of corpses in the Hooghly. Christian burials were anxious about demarcating the military and civilian whites from the natives. Organising a Muslim Burial Board raised the question of administering the customary low caste and Vaishnava burials in Muslim grounds. Municipal endeavours to shut down certain cremation and burial grounds were regularly challenged or assisted by local indigenous groups. On the other hand, while pauper bodies went to the Medical College to become the ‘grotesque’ cadavers of medical research and native cremation and burial grounds were attempted to be moved to the peripheries of the city, in contrast elite white officers’ bodies were memorialised as individuated ‘classic bodies’ with monuments at the heart of the British Indian capital. Much of how deaths are managed in urban cities like Calcutta had their roots in the interfaces of the 19th century. With Calcutta as a strategic case study, it is only within a large framework of varied notions of private property, land-value, sanitary theories, tussles between several layers of administrative powers and the religion-gender-class-race nexus that one can even begin to write the history of management of death in a colonial city.  

**Measuring Public Health in a Colonial City: Civil Mortality Statistics Collection in 19th Century Calcutta and its Suburbs**. _JASMed, Johns Hopkins University_.  

This paper for the first time looks into the history of production of civil mortality statistics as the prime index of public health in the colonial, commercial city of Calcutta. It argues that even though civil death registration in Calcutta can be traced back to 1802, it remained a neglected institution throughout the 19th century even when mortality statistics were copiously used in public health discourses. Before the plague in 1890s, the municipality did not spend more than 1 % of their budget on such institutions. While medical professionals in Calcutta were the first to demand better statistics for the civil population believing these figures could also serve as rhetoric to increase their clout in administrative circles, military and mercantile concerns were the actual triggers that led to establishment of registration offices in 1873. These focused mostly on ‘fevers’ and cholera which killed British soldiers and raised international commercial and sanitary concerns. While comparison with England reveals that broader structures of representations like nosological tables were adopted easily after the introduction of lithographic print, collection in Calcutta had a more limited scope as the government feared that inquiring about death would trigger religious and social reactions. In spite of having health officers and death registration offices, primary role of documenting the causes of death remained with the meagerly paid cremators called ‘doms’ or 'chowkidars' (watchmen) who belonged to untouchable castes. Their Bengali 'hathchitha' (handwritten reports) remained the unacknowledged main plank upon which public health discourses were represented in British administrative documents.  

**Field Report: Creating an Archive of Manual Labor at Burial and Cremation Grounds in Kolkata**. _History in Action Research Fellow_.  

As part of History in Action Project Award (Summer 2017), an initiative from the History Department, Columbia University, this is an ongoing project that allowed me to understand the technicalities of management of death through the experts on ground. I spent time with cremationists, embalmers, coffin makers to understand forms of labor, how crematoriums are actually made and used, and how these under-recognized works and organizations sustain the functions of a metropolis.
See: http://historyinaction.columbia.edu/field-notes/hapa-sohini-chattopadhyay-speaks-her-experience-creating-archive-manual-labor-burial-and-cremation-grounds-kolkata/

**How the ad industry persuaded Indians to wear the Sanitary Pads**. _Offprint, Reprinted on scroll.in, qz.com._  

A brief history of how Indians came to use sanitary napkins. It moved from elite white women's materials for 'comfort' to women's product for 'hygeine' and eventually an equipment for the modern Indian women. From Johnsons to Proctor and Gamble and small local companies that fought hard for their survivals, these blood giants slowly and steadily made an inroad into urban crowds. See: https://qz.com/610755/how-global-mncs-convinced-indians-to-use-sanitary-napkins/
